src/posts/04-linnaeus.md, before:

---
title: A console app to catalog photo files.
date: 2021-11-09
tags:
  - posts
layout: layouts/post.njk
---

In september 2020 I purchased my first camera: a [Nikon D3500](https://www.nikon.co.uk/en_GB/news-press/press.tag/news/bv-pr-wwa1808-outshine-the-ordinary-with-the-new-d3500-dslr.dcr). Not long after I found myself with a large catalog of pictures and image files of all sorts: RAW image files, original JPEGs from the camera, xmp and metadata files from [Shotwell](https://wiki.gnome.org/Apps/Shotwell) and [Darktable](https://www.darktable.org/), final JPEGs and PNGs after doing some *postpro* work on the source images... in essence I had a mess. Shotwell did it's best at organizing the source images for me, but once they went through Darktable the output was very hard to organize.

Should I put my edited images in the folders with the original images? How will I be able to easily go back to a set of pictures without having to remember the date? Am I now tied to Shotwell for as long as I want to process my digital pics?

After putting that off for more than a year, and reading [a lot](https://ninedegreesbelow.com/photography/dam-ingest.html) about how [other](https://www.reddit.com/r/photography/comments/5ipbvq/organizing_and_backing_up_a_large_pro_library/) photographers organize [their own](https://www.quora.com/Whats-the-best-way-to-organize-a-large-set-of-photos-on-Windows)  catalogues, and learning of all the possible workflows and the involved risks of losing your metadata, losing your files, forgetting their locations, etc. I decided enough was enough and started sketching an idea to *taxonomize* my pictures database.

Buckle up your seat-belts as I dive into naming and why it's important.

## Carl Linnaeus and Taxonomy
[Carl Linnaeus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_Linnaeus) was basically the guy who invented classifying things, well maybe not the guy who invented it but the guy who made a thing out of classifying things, well maybe that neither but his method of naming and classifying living beings is the one who stood with the scientific community. The key for such success is the simplicity of the taxonomic model he proposed.

In biology and linguistics there is this concept of "taxonomy" that is very important, specially in biology, as it's the way species are tagged apart from each other.

Basically Linnaeus proposed a model in which species are named using a binomial nomenclature: two names for each species, a first one for the genus of the species, capitalised, and a second one specific to that species inside their genus. Much like [chinese personal names](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_name), species would have a "family name" first and their "given name" second. This taxonomy allows to endlessly classify species with simplicity and allows to encode important information within the species name that can be understood at first by other people, granted they know latin and greek etimology.

Great examples within the dinosaur community:

* Albertosaurus sarcophagus -> Alberta(from) Lizard Flesh Eater -> Flesh eating lizard from Alberta.
* Tyrannosaurus rex -> Tyrant Lizard King -> King of the tyrant lizards.
* Diplodocus carnegiei -> Double Beam Carnegie(of) -> Double-spined of Carnegie.
* Diplodocus hallorum -> Double Beam Hall(of) -> Double-spined of Hall.

This naming system genius' lies withing it's simplicity and the fact that it opens itself up to encode information that comes from the species itself: anatomic perks, where they are from, what they eat, who discovered them, etc. It's like creating a unique [hash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_function) string to ID every species by using their traits as input, key difference on the fact that the output of this "hashing" is human readable (as previously stated, to a degree).

"Dude, what is this dinosaur talk?" I know it sounds off topic, but that last part in the above paragraph will make sense very soon if it doesn't already hit a bell to you.

## Enter `linnaeus`
Following the naming philosophy popularised by Carl Linnaeus, why not implement it in a way that can fit large photo files libraries? Digital pictures already pack a lot of information about themselves: the infamous EXIF data along with all their file metadata. I realized that thanks to that info I should be able to build an application that given a taxonomy to fill up with image metadata would generate unique names for each photo file I would produce.

Much like hashing, the goal would be to have something take an input and give me a unique and consistent output each and everytime it had the same input. The idea behind this being that with such a system it will be easy to import pictures without worrying about duplicates and it would be possible to store both input files (taken from the camera) and output files (after going through Darktable) in a consistent, collision free way that made sense and would allow me to navigate the photo collection with ease by being able to understand each file by just looking at their file name.

The product that came out of this realisation is [`linnaeus`](https://github.com/subiabre/linnaeus). A command line tool that can ingest image files to rename and move them around based in a given configuration specifying the taxonomy.

This configuration file looks like this:
```yaml
input:
  copyFiles: true

output:
  fileHashLength: 6
  naming: 
    files: 
      - "{date.year}-{date.month}-{date.day}"
      - "-{date.hour}{date.minutes}{date.seconds}"
      - "_{image.width}x{image.height}_{file.hash}"
      - ".{file.extension}"
    folders: "/{date.year}/{date.month}/{date.day}/{image.type}"
```
That configuration means that each input file should be copied to the output.
These files should be named using an structure based on their date, then their time of the day, then the image sizes, then the image hash first six characters and then the file extension.
The files will then be moved into folders based on the year, the month and the day they were taken, plus their image type.

An image ingested by linnaeus with said configuration would look like:

`/2010/12/25/jpeg/2010-12-25-213014_1200x800_ab01cd.jpeg`

Which, I admit it may look like complete gibberish for the non-initiated but, it's actually very use and information-ful.

To reach that image we would need to navigate to the folder 2010 > 12 > 25 > jpeg.
When reading the image file name: **2010-12-25-213014_1200x800_ab01cd.jpeg**, you can easily dissect each section of the name to get image information:

1. The image was taken in 2010-12-25: December 25th, 2010.
2. The image was taken at 213014: 21:30 and 14 seconds.
3. The image has a size of 1200px wide and 800px tall.

The string at the end being the very SHA256 hash the image produces, which I use (and encourage you to use in your linnaeus taxonomy) as a discriminator to avoid collisions between files that are different end versions of the same original image.

`linnaeus` allows me to have an organized library free of duplicated files, collisions, loss of information and loss of files by obscurity by implementing a 200 years old idea into the realm of filenaming.
All of it without ever having to input myself any single data more than the casual *linnaeus.yaml* file in a folder where I want the pictures to be put into folders or have filenames with an structure different to the structure defined in the main configuration.
And overall it allows my library to be not only app independent, unlike I was while using Shotwell, but also system independent. The library itself is also the catalogue and the database. I can upload my files to a cloud service and I would still find my pictures with ease.

Commit message:

Include post description in posts listing

src/posts/04-linnaeus.md, after:

---
title: A console app to catalog photo files.
date: 2021-11-09
description: How I saved myself from cluttering my photo library by implementing an idea from 200 years ago.
tags:
  - posts
layout: layouts/post.njk
---

In september 2020 I purchased my first camera: a [Nikon D3500](https://www.nikon.co.uk/en_GB/news-press/press.tag/news/bv-pr-wwa1808-outshine-the-ordinary-with-the-new-d3500-dslr.dcr). Not long after I found myself with a large catalog of pictures and image files of all sorts: RAW image files, original JPEGs from the camera, xmp and metadata files from [Shotwell](https://wiki.gnome.org/Apps/Shotwell) and [Darktable](https://www.darktable.org/), final JPEGs and PNGs after doing some *postpro* work on the source images... in essence I had a mess. Shotwell did it's best at organizing the source images for me, but once they went through Darktable the output was very hard to organize.

Should I put my edited images in the folders with the original images? How will I be able to easily go back to a set of pictures without having to remember the date? Am I now tied to Shotwell for as long as I want to process my digital pics?

After putting that off for more than a year, and reading [a lot](https://ninedegreesbelow.com/photography/dam-ingest.html) about how [other](https://www.reddit.com/r/photography/comments/5ipbvq/organizing_and_backing_up_a_large_pro_library/) photographers organize [their own](https://www.quora.com/Whats-the-best-way-to-organize-a-large-set-of-photos-on-Windows)  catalogues, and learning of all the possible workflows and the involved risks of losing your metadata, losing your files, forgetting their locations, etc. I decided enough was enough and started sketching an idea to *taxonomize* my pictures database.

Buckle up your seat-belts as I dive into naming and why it's important.

## Carl Linnaeus and Taxonomy
[Carl Linnaeus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_Linnaeus) was basically the guy who invented classifying things, well maybe not the guy who invented it but the guy who made a thing out of classifying things, well maybe that neither but his method of naming and classifying living beings is the one who stood with the scientific community. The key for such success is the simplicity of the taxonomic model he proposed.

In biology and linguistics there is this concept of "taxonomy" that is very important, specially in biology, as it's the way species are tagged apart from each other.

Basically Linnaeus proposed a model in which species are named using a binomial nomenclature: two names for each species, a first one for the genus of the species, capitalised, and a second one specific to that species inside their genus. Much like [chinese personal names](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_name), species would have a "family name" first and their "given name" second. This taxonomy allows to endlessly classify species with simplicity and allows to encode important information within the species name that can be understood at first by other people, granted they know latin and greek etimology.

Great examples within the dinosaur community:

* Albertosaurus sarcophagus -> Alberta(from) Lizard Flesh Eater -> Flesh eating lizard from Alberta.
* Tyrannosaurus rex -> Tyrant Lizard King -> King of the tyrant lizards.
* Diplodocus carnegiei -> Double Beam Carnegie(of) -> Double-spined of Carnegie.
* Diplodocus hallorum -> Double Beam Hall(of) -> Double-spined of Hall.

This naming system genius' lies withing it's simplicity and the fact that it opens itself up to encode information that comes from the species itself: anatomic perks, where they are from, what they eat, who discovered them, etc. It's like creating a unique [hash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_function) string to ID every species by using their traits as input, key difference on the fact that the output of this "hashing" is human readable (as previously stated, to a degree).

"Dude, what is this dinosaur talk?" I know it sounds off topic, but that last part in the above paragraph will make sense very soon if it doesn't already hit a bell to you.

## Enter `linnaeus`
Following the naming philosophy popularised by Carl Linnaeus, why not implement it in a way that can fit large photo files libraries? Digital pictures already pack a lot of information about themselves: the infamous EXIF data along with all their file metadata. I realized that thanks to that info I should be able to build an application that given a taxonomy to fill up with image metadata would generate unique names for each photo file I would produce.

Much like hashing, the goal would be to have something take an input and give me a unique and consistent output each and everytime it had the same input. The idea behind this being that with such a system it will be easy to import pictures without worrying about duplicates and it would be possible to store both input files (taken from the camera) and output files (after going through Darktable) in a consistent, collision free way that made sense and would allow me to navigate the photo collection with ease by being able to understand each file by just looking at their file name.

The product that came out of this realisation is [`linnaeus`](https://github.com/subiabre/linnaeus). A command line tool that can ingest image files to rename and move them around based in a given configuration specifying the taxonomy.

This configuration file looks like this:
```yaml
input:
  copyFiles: true

output:
  fileHashLength: 6
  naming: 
    files: 
      - "{date.year}-{date.month}-{date.day}"
      - "-{date.hour}{date.minutes}{date.seconds}"
      - "_{image.width}x{image.height}_{file.hash}"
      - ".{file.extension}"
    folders: "/{date.year}/{date.month}/{date.day}/{image.type}"
```
That configuration means that each input file should be copied to the output.
These files should be named using an structure based on their date, then their time of the day, then the image sizes, then the image hash first six characters and then the file extension.
The files will then be moved into folders based on the year, the month and the day they were taken, plus their image type.

An image ingested by linnaeus with said configuration would look like:

`/2010/12/25/jpeg/2010-12-25-213014_1200x800_ab01cd.jpeg`

Which, I admit it may look like complete gibberish for the non-initiated but, it's actually very use and information-ful.

To reach that image we would need to navigate to the folder 2010 > 12 > 25 > jpeg.
When reading the image file name: **2010-12-25-213014_1200x800_ab01cd.jpeg**, you can easily dissect each section of the name to get image information:

1. The image was taken in 2010-12-25: December 25th, 2010.
2. The image was taken at 213014: 21:30 and 14 seconds.
3. The image has a size of 1200px wide and 800px tall.

The string at the end being the very SHA256 hash the image produces, which I use (and encourage you to use in your linnaeus taxonomy) as a discriminator to avoid collisions between files that are different end versions of the same original image.

`linnaeus` allows me to have an organized library free of duplicated files, collisions, loss of information and loss of files by obscurity by implementing a 200 years old idea into the realm of filenaming.
All of it without ever having to input myself any single data more than the casual *linnaeus.yaml* file in a folder where I want the pictures to be put into folders or have filenames with an structure different to the structure defined in the main configuration.
And overall it allows my library to be not only app independent, unlike I was while using Shotwell, but also system independent. The library itself is also the catalogue and the database. I can upload my files to a cloud service and I would still find my pictures with ease.
